good evening and welcome to Dr Jordan B
Peterson's we who wrestle with God Tour
[Applause]
all these great bands and here you are
tonight well thank you very much for
coming let me tell you what's going to
happen tonight I'm I'm going to share my
thoughts with you for 70 minutes
thereabouts then I have a special guest
here Constantine kizen who runs a
podcast
good well you should know about him
definitely crazy Russian from the
UK uh a a real a real voice of reason
for for our our our uh fellow westerners
in the UK Constantine is going to come
out on stage and um torture me about
what I said I hope well what I'm hoping
Constantine is um um very clear thinker
very witty man he's got a very sharp
mind he's critically oriented in the
best possible way a good critical mind
separates the wheat from the chaff right
because to be property critical isn't to
hurt or destroy with criticism it's to
separate what's truly valuable from what
isn't valuable so that you have Solid
Ground to stand on and you know one of
the things that I've strived to do in my
whole academic career is to move closer
and closer
to believing in and stating and writing
things that I
can't I can't
move
and you do that yourself by subjecting
your own presumptions to critical
analysis you do that so that you think
through what you're doing so that you
don't act out your stupid ideas in the
world and die and and that's the purpose
of thinking right seriously the purpose
of thinking is
to have your stupid ideas die instead of
you and that's part of the reason why
your enemy can be your best friend
because if someone can take out
something you think because they can
show you how it's erroneous and
counterproductive and then you don't
have to go through all the trouble of
learning that stupidly in the world
that's a fine gift and so I'm hoping
that Constantine can stand in for for
the for the audience for the critical
and skeptical audience were talking
about very difficult issues it's highly
likely
that I could formulate what I'm stating
more clearly and precisely and so
Constantine will come out
and we'll discuss what was presented
tonight and then we'll turn to the
questions that you've kindly delivered
and discuss those and and then we'll
reintroduce the band and that should do
for the evening and so that's the plan
and so away we go I'm very much looking
forward to
[Applause]
this so the first thing we're going to
talk about is we're going to talk about
stories and and set the
stage um I think we're at a crucial
inflection
point in in the world culturally and
philosophically I think we're on the
dawn of a new set of
realizations a new set of realizations
that will return us to our
fundamentals I think the reason that we
have a culture War raging in the west
why there's so much
instability is because something new is
struggling to be born or reborn
and I want to explain the reason for
that first and
and the reason is that the enlightenment
view of the world which has guided our
technological and scientific Endeavor
our conceptual Endeavor our
philosophical Endeavor
for a few hundred
years is there's something about it
that's wrong like deeply wrong and that
error is making itself manifest in the
scientific Community because I would say
now that scientists themselves from a
multitude of different disciplines
understand that the idea that we see the
world as a place of facts or that we see
the world as rational creatures or that
you can even see the world that way is
wrong wrong and I believe that it's it's
been demonstrated to be wrong it's this
isn't a matter of mere philosophical
opinion anymore although it's also that
one example for example is that the
newest artificial intelligence systems
that we've designed the large language
models that have burst onto the stage in
the last year or thereabouts chat GPT
the catastrophic Gemini that Google so
foolishly launched um Elon musk's
grock these systems are trained like
human beings are trained they have an
aim they have a purpose they were
trained with reward and Punishment so to
speak they're approximations to a Target
they see the world through a structure
of value that they have absorbed from
human
beings to make the world's smartest
linguistic
machines we had to inculcate in the a
structure of
value okay and so and and we produced
machines now that can engage in
discourse that can use language in a way
that's virtually indistinguishable from
the human and that's going to become
radically indistinguishable from the
human very very rapidly and they're not
programmed like lists of rules they're
not programmed like
ordinary thinking machines they're
programmed the same way that human
beings learn they're programmed with aim
they have an ethos and an ethic
we can't Orient ourselves in the
world with the
facts we can't follow the
science because science isn't a leader
science doesn't establish our aims our
aims are established using mechanisms of
perception and emotion and thought that
aren't in themselves scientific we're
aiming at something
why can't we Orient oursel in the world
with the
facts well the simplest explanation for
that is that there are too many
facts there's as many facts as there are
phenomena more actually there's as many
facts as there are possible combinations
of phenomena you drown in the facts when
you're confused in your own life and
things are chaotic and you're anxious
it's because a plethora of possibilities
is making itself manifest in front of
you and you don't know which way to turn
you don't have a clear Direction you
don't have a clear aim there's no way of
simplifying the world so that you can
act in it we know for example that to
perceive the world you have to
obliterate from your Consciousness
almost everything that you could
see because otherwise you
you're overwhelmed we know even that the
hallucinogens who are being studied in
with increasing intensity in recent
years interfere with your normal
perception such that they bring to
Consciousness a plethora of things that
under normal circumstances you ignore
and the consequence of that is a influx
of a sense of overwhelming significance
and meaning but at the same time a kind
of paralysis of action because when
everything becomes infinitely meaningful
there's no straightforward way of moving
forward when you're in a restaurant with
someone on a first date and you're
focusing on the conversation and actions
of your date in a sea of
competing conversations you zero out
everything that you could be attending
to in every other table all the
competing thoughts in your imagination
all the things you could be bringing to
mind to zero in with like laser pinpoint
accuracy on what it is that your partner
in conversation is doing and you do that
in the world all the time you make one
thing at a time of Pinnacle importance
and you arrange everything else in the
world at every moment that you perceive
around that thing that you've made of
iCal
importance that's how you see the world
and I don't mean think about the world
this is under thought it's more
profound it's what you do when you
actually
see if I decide to do
something
straightforward like walk from here to
the stairs on the stage and I set my aim
I don't perceive any of you you in
consequence because the fact of your
existence is irrelevant to my purpose
and you're
gone none of the facts of the stage that
I could attend to are relevant and
perceptible anymore except in so far as
their Pathways or facilitators or
obstacles to my journey forward if I'm
looking to the stairs I see the chairs
but not as places to sit I see them as
obstacles that I have to circumvent in
order to attain my aim everything that
you see in the world makes itself
manifest in accordance with your aim and
that's a radically
revolutionarily different way of
conceptualizing the world
than the notion that you take the facts
and you sort them despite their infinite
number and calculate your way with the
facts rationally
forward that's not what you do all
right here's a proposition to
contemplate it's it's another
proposition that has revolutionary
significance it'll explain all sorts of
things that you know to be true but
don't know why they're
true that
description of the
structure through which you see the
world is a
story that's what a story is okay so now
this explains many things that are
otherwise left as Mysteries or or side
effects I read a book by Steven Pinker
once pinker's an Enlightenment
rationalist from Harvard and a good guy
and very smart and much of what he says
is extraordinarily useful but he
believes for example that our proclivity
to enjoy and tell stories is like a side
effect of something more fundamental
cognitively it's it's the story as
entertainment Theory you go to a movie
because it's it's fun you you read a
book of fiction to your child because
it's fun it's it's not core to
the what would you say it's not a core
element of the way that you exist in the
world
it's mere
entertainment it misses the point that
theory why is it
entertaining why can you teach children
with
stories if this if you get the story
right for a child you can capture the
child's interest and you
can integrate almost any form of
learning into the story and the child
will be captivated by that when children
play pretend play which they do spontan
ously they spontaneously dramatize the
world they
spontaneously make stories out of their
roles and their and their Destinies and
that that that captures them that forms
the basis of their friendships that's
why children want to play so
frenetically is that they're practicing
modeling the world when you go see a
movie it's not that you want to be
entertained although it is entertained
that's not why you're there it's not for
fun either that's easy to understand and
to and to see what's fun about a horror
movie I'm dead serious it's
like people will be so afraid in a
horror movie that they'll cover their
eyes they'll hide behind the chair in
front of them they'll ask themselves
afterwards why they even put themselves
through it and yet they'll line up and
pay to do it well why would you
line up and pay to torture
yourself
well CU you want to know how to deal
with what's
horrifying and you want to practice that
in a way if you can that isn't in itself
fatal you want to expose yourself to the
catastrophes of existence so that you're
prepared when those catastrophes come
along you want to expose yourself to the
pred the Predators that lurk everywhere
you want to inure yourself against
what's disgusting and contaminating
because you're going to have to deal
with it you want to expose yourself to
what's frightening so that you can find
the courage within you to deal with
what's frightening and that's part of
the instinct to develop and expand your
competence and it's in that expansion of
competence and skill that occurs as a
consequence of that voluntary exposure
that the entertainment is situated the
reason that's entertaining is because
it's part of the manner in which you
expand
yourself and you can do that in the
direction of what's dark and terrible
just as you can in the direction of say
what's
heroic what do you do when you go to a
movie well you you you fasten onto a
character and you understand that
character the same way that you
understand people that you're in
conversation with now you might think
that the way that you understand people
is by you listen to what they say and
you extract out the knowledge that
they're delivering to you in terms of
facts and you interpret the facts and
you derive your understanding of the
person like none of that's true that has
absolutely nothing to do with how you
establish a relationship with someone
and well here's some proof is that what
you do with a
dog well obviously not but you can
establish a relationship with a dog and
so and the relationship you have with a
dog it's not the same as the
relationship with with a person but a
dog's a pack animal a dog can become a
member of the family you can you can
understand a dog well enough so the dog
likes you right and so whatever you're
doing with the dog it isn't discourse
about propositions CU most of the dogs
you own don't talk
so and it's the same with very young
children and
and it's the same with an infant you
establish a relationship using
mechanisms that aren't propositional
they're not rules they're not
descriptions they're not facts that's
not how you do it how do you do it where
do you look when you talk to someone you
look at their
eyes why to see where they're pointing
them why so you can see what they're
looking at
why so you can infer what's important to
them because we point our eyes that
that's that which is important to us
that's why our eyes look the way they
look black in the middle colored on that
ring around that against a white
background that's an evolved mechanism I
can see your eyes all of our ancestors
who eyes whose eyes weren't visible
either got killed or didn't reproduce
the one thing you want to know about
someone right away is where the hell
their eyes are pointed and you can do
that politely which you do by attending
to someone without too predatory a stare
you do that by attending politely to
their face but not too intensely and not
attending let's say inappropriately to
other parts of their body and and
they're going to be watching you to see
what you do with your eyes because the
one thing you want to know about someone
above all else is what the hell are they
up to right what's their
aim and so when you go to a movie that's
what you do when you watch a
character in role you see him in a
variety of different
situations and you watch how he
structures his attention what he pays
attention to because attention is a
costly business and so people pay
attention to what they value you watch
what they attend to and you watch how
they prioritize their actions and from
that you derive an understanding of
what's important to them as soon as you
understand what's important to them
you've got their aim you've figured that
character out this is what you do when
you learn to know someone what's their
aim as soon as you know their
aim you can see the world through their
eyes you can see the same objects they
see and the objects take on the same
emotional significance and when you say
I come to understand someone what you
really mean is oh I understand their aim
and now I can aim a at the same thing at
least in simulation at least fictionally
and I can come to inhabit the same world
of perception and emotion that they
inhabit I can even guess
at how they might act into what they
might attend in situations I haven't
seen because now I know their aim what's
he up to that's what you're thinking in
a murder mystery or in a thriller what's
he up to what's he up to what's going to
happen next and so the plot of the
fiction is the aim of the character
across time the aim as the character
unfolds and that might involve the
transformation of his aims as well right
and that would be the transformation of
a character in a movie he aims at one
thing and he learns that that aim is off
in some manner or he comes to a bitter
and dismal partial end and has to switch
course and you want to see people
transform their aims that's character
development we see the world through a
story the world res the world's objects
reveal themselves in relationship to our
aim
the landscape of emotion presents itself
as markers on the pathway to our aim the
world reveals itself in accordance with
our aim that's how perception works
that's a hell of a thing to learn
because if the world for example appears
to you only as Thorn bearing
obstacles right if you feel that
everything's array against you and
there's no pathway forward if you feel
that you're surrounded by foes and
obstacles instead of walking the golden
pathway accompanied by allies with the
world on your side you might ask
yourself whether or not your aim is
wrong and
so the world lays itself out in
accordance with our aim we go
we produce fiction we generate
fiction we live in a fictional
landscape because we want to get our aim
right we read stories we watch movies we
go to plays we talk to each other
because we want to get our aim right we
want to find the place we should go and
we want to learn how to get there
efficiently and we're
compelled by spirit and instinct to to
establish the aim and follow the path
and to transform ourselves so that our
aim becomes ever more precise and
efficient and delivers us a world that's
ever more abundant and
beautiful and that's all a function of
aim big tech companies enrich themselves
by taking your personal data they grab
your web history email metadata and
video searches to create a detailed
profile on you and then they sell sell
that off to the highest bidder companies
aren't just selling products anymore
they're selling you to protect your
identity and data from these Tech Giants
I recommend using expressvpn every time
you go online think about all the
websites you visit everything you do and
say online is tracked using your public
IP address which allows them to uniquely
match your activity and know your
location expressvpn makes you anonymous
online by camouflaging your IP address
and replacing it with a different secure
IP of your choice expressvpn also
encrypts all of your data to protect it
from hackers and anyone else who might
try to spy on you what I like most about
expressvpn though is how easy it is to
use just download the app on your phone
or computer tap one button and you're
protected so if you're like me and you
believe your internet data belongs to
you then expressvpn is the answer
protect your online data today by
visiting expressvpn.com Jordan
expressvpn.com Jordan and you can get an
extra 3 months free
that's expressvpn.com
[Music]
Jordan okay so we live in a story well
then as soon as you know that this is
what the postmodernists figured out by
the way this is why the literary critics
have become a dominant force in the
culture War the postmodernists were
literary critics you think well there's
nothing more irrelevant than a literary
critic like who the hell cares what an
intellectual thinks about a story I mean
of all the posterous things to be
concerned about that might top the list
not if the story is the thing through
which you see the world if the story is
the thing you see through which you see
the world there's nothing more powerful
than a literary critic except perhaps an
author and we wouldn't have a culture
War right now if the literary critic
wasn't far more powerful than anybody
had possibly imagined because the French
intellectual literary critics known as
the postmodernists have
criticized the central story of the West
to death and that's why we have a
culture war and it's no joke this is
foundational there's no more serious
conflict than that and you all can feel
that that's why you're here you know
that the world is shaking and uncertain
in a way that's new and the reason for
that is the story itself is under
assault all right so let's let's wander
through that a little bit
you see the world through a
story The rationalists or empiricists
even the biologists they might have an
answer to that they say okay fof you see
the world through a story but the story
is biologically determined or
socioculturally determined it's a story
of sex that would be Freud because for
Freud and for Charles Darwin for that
matter for Richard Dawkins the famous
atheist to an equal
degree the story The the
the aim is sex reproduction and the
story
is predicated on that aim Freud Darwin
Dawkins the degenerate element of that
is a descent into a kind of Hedonism
because if sex is the story then why not
worship
sex and some
dispute that and say no the central
story isn't sex this would be the
marxists the central story
is
power that's the story that the
universities tell when they're not
telling the story about
sex it's all about
power the essential
human aim is domination oppression
victimization
exploitation the central theme of the
family is a power Dynamic the central
theme of the relationship between men
and women is a power dynamic marriage
itself is a heteronormative
patriarchal establishment of Oppression
that goes back to the dawn of time the
nuclear families the same
thing economic arrangements are nothing
but Power friendships are nothing but
Power the
landscape of human interaction is a
dynamic of power or sex or both or both
fighting against one
another look these are powerful ideas
why well obvious it's obvious why I mean
first of
all without sex there's no reproduction
and without
reproduction there's no people and so
the darwinian Freudian Richard daw's
selfish Gene claim is that well what
could it possibly be other than
sex and the marxists come running
forward and say how about
power and then the Marxist say well
obviously it's power
because there's radical inequality in
the world there's some who have and some
who have not there's no reason to assume
that property in the final analysis
let's say isn't a form of theft and
everyone who has established themselves
in some manner has only done that
by stealing from those who are powerless
and who have less everything they have
and acre it to themselves and that's a
credible claim for a variety of reasons
the first most fundamental reason is is
that a minority of people have all the
success on any possible dimension of
comparison it's a very small number of
people who are radically attractive it's
a very small number of people who are
radically gifted in the visual arts
let's say it's a radically small
percentage of people who are musicians a
tiny percentage of the people have most
of the money a tiny percentage of the
people gather most of the
attention it's a Pito distribution and
that's what Mark pointed on to the rich
get richer and the poor get poorer and
there's real truth in that and there's
truth in the claim
that people structure their
relationships with power and and that
some people who obtain success do it as
a consequence of exploitation and it's
equally true that when any human
relationship
deteriorates it tends to deteriorate in
the relationship of power if your
marriage starts to become
shaky then you begin to exploit each
other you use Force you try to get your
way you try to dominate it's the same
within any family that's deteriorating
into a state of pathology it's the same
in any organization we've seen huge
States deteriorate into the tyrannical
use of power if you had to
identify a cardinal attribute of
mankind Powers a
reasonable
hypothesis but let's think about that
for a minute so imagine
that well imagine that it's sex that is
and should be the
complete story of mankind well what does
what does that mean exactly what's a
world organized on
that basis what is a world organized on
that basis look
like well there's nothing more important
than sex well how about immediate sexual
gratification whenever you want it how
about immediate sexual gratification as
the archetype of
Hedonism how about immediate sexual
gratification whenever you want it
regardless of what anyone else has to
stay say about it because if it's the
story and it's the fundamental story
then what stops me from Gaining access
to what I want right now regardless of
the cost to anyone else espe if there's
nothing beyond that if only the naive
believe that there's anything Noble
about Humanity beyond the immediate
demand of reproduction then what have
you got to say that's moral about sex
and why the hell shouldn't everybody
just do exactly what they want with
whoever they want whenever they want all
the
time and with power you can make exactly
the same argument and classical
societies aristocratic societies
militaristic and Marshal societies are
predicated on this idea if I can push
you
around all that indicates is that I
should push you around because if you're
so weak that I can push you around you
have absolutely no ground whatsoever to
stand on to oppose me because if you
were moral by the traditions of power I
wouldn't be able to push you
around and so it's very difficult to
argue out of that from a rational
perspective why doesn't might make right
and why isn't it only the weak who claim
that that's wrong and why isn't it only
that the weak claim that that's wrong
not because they're moral but because
they're weak that would certainly be a
spin-off on the nian notion that will to
power con
constitutes the core of man and I would
say up until the dawn of judeo-christian
ethic let's
say power ruled and then we could
imagine what sort of world it's like
when power rules well we know what that
world's like it's like pay attention to
the strongest or suffer the
consequences well is there something
beyond
that That's Not Mere naivity
what's if it isn't power that's the
story and if it isn't sex that's the
story what's the
story for the West the the answer to
that
is the library of the
Bible that's the story it's the
story upon which the West is
founded it's the story
that has a Arisen over thousands of
years tens of thousands of years for
that
matter attempting to address the core
issue what's the fundamental
story it's no mystery to make the claim
that the claim of the biblical library
of stories because it is a library is
that it's the fundamental
story all right so
we live in a
story we've identified the competitors
power and
sex what is it that's being expressed in
the biblical story look if you go to a
movie you read a complex book you go to
a sophisticated movie A sophisticated
play a Shakespearean play or you read a
sophisticated work of fiction you see a
multi-dimensional
characterization right a comic book has
a hero with one motive
a sophisticated work of fiction has a
hero and perhaps an anti-hero with
complex multi-dimensional motivations
whatever characterizes those more
realistic people isn't reducible to any
single attribute and in a complicated
work of fiction the author walks you
through a multi-dimensional
characterization you see the same person
the hero aiming up Ward the anti-hero or
villain aiming downward you see that
person portrayed in multiple different
situations and as a and and and
pursuing partial reflections of their
ultimate aim and in consequence of that
you learn to understand and
embody that complex of
aims when you see a movie and you watch
the hero you're watching the hero to
learn how to act like a
hero when you're watching a movie and
you watch the anti-hero or the villain
you're watching the movie to learn how
not to fail catastrophically and land in
Hell while taking everyone else along
with
you is it
reducible to something as simple as
power or
sex not if it's not a comic book you
need a multi-dimensional characteriz
ation all
right the biblical Corpus provides a
multi-dimensional characterization of
the fundamental aim of man and Cosmos
that's the claim of the book so I'm
going to walk you through some of the
stories and show you what's being
revealed what's being revealed is the
proper object of worship okay so what
does that mean the proper object of
Celebration the aim towards which all
sacrifices and work are to be directed
that which should be held in the highest
regard that which should be imitated in
ritual and
admiration okay so that's the that's the
idea admiration in the same way that a
small child
who hero
worships the boy down the street who's
the baseball star
because that
boy portrays a pattern of skill and
attention that is the next appropriate
developmental step for the hero
worshipping child that's a recreation of
the
religious impulse the impulse to look up
admire and imitate the question being
what to what should we address our
attention upward looking admire and
imitate that highest
possible object of apprehension and
admiration is by
definition God it's a
definition it's the highest aim that
lurks behind all proximal aims that's a
good way of thinking about it it's the
upward aim as
such all right how do you bring that
down to earth well let's start with
Genesis 1 there's a characterization of
God and man in Genesis
1 the the story opens at the dawn of
time at the beginning of things that's
not exactly the beginning of time that's
usually how it's read but it's more
complex than that it's not only the
beginning of time in the linear sense
but it's the beginning of all things
that begin this is what happens every
time something begins this is what
happens every time something new makes
its entry into the world it's the
continual B beginning that continually
unfolds that happened and is happening
now and will always happen it's the
pattern
of the emergence of order out of chaos
that makes itself
manifest in the form of your
life how is the stage set the spirit of
God
hovers over the water over the
Deep you hear
that in the judeo-christian tradition
God engenders the world EX nilo out of
nothing that's not how the story sets
itself up it sets itself up with the
spirit of God hovering above the waters
but it's not water that's not the word
water is one of the symbolic
images attempting to make what's being
described
clear using a sequence of complex
metaphors the word for the water over
which the spirit of God hovers is toou
vaboh or Tome and it means it means a
lot of things it
means it means the the dragon that lives
at the bottom of the deepest well it
means the unplumbed depth of the most
abysmal ocean it means the water that
brings forth life it means
the it means the infinite well of
possibility
itself it means the confusion that rains
when your World falls
apart it means the
UN
structured day that makes itself
manifest with you wake
up it means all of that it means the
dragon that the archaic God sliced into
pieces and made the world
from it means it's the Hydra that
Hercules defeats to form the world it's
all of
that so what does that
mean it means that the spirit of being
and becoming generates the world from
possibility
what does that mean that's what your
Consciousness does that's what you do
see you think you're surrounded by a
world of objects that you manipulate in
a robotic fashion but you're not
concerned with the objects that are
static you're concerned with what you
can dynamically transform when you wake
up in the morning what presents itself
to you is a field of indeterminate
opportunity that's why you
worried or perhaps excited because you
have something to Grapple with that
hasn't yet come into being the
possibilities of the day and you might
think oh my God I have so many things to
do I'm overwhelmed it's too much well
that's the toou vaboh that's the chaos
and confusion that's a plethora of
possibility you're thinking oh my God
how many ways are there for things to go
wrong well that's the multi-headed
serpent that the hero always
confronts and what do you have to do
with that it's like
well are you going to establish the
order that's good in the course of the
day because that's what you're called
upon to do and it's your Recreation of
what God himself does at the beginning
of time that constitutes the action of
your conscious on the possibility that's
in front of you you have a microcosm of
plenitude and possibility right in front
of you at any moment that you can
wrestle into order if your aim is
right the
process that God relies on to extract
the cosmos the order that's good from
The Well of unform possibility is the
word it's the logos what does that mean
how much hell can you bring into being
by saying the wrong words to your
wife right now your wife is who she is
but she's also who she could become as
you've no doubt noticed many times and
you can extract
out something good or something terrible
from the possibility she represents with
the cautious and love in application of
your words or with the careful and
prideful and dismissive application of
your words and the world you live
in will be radically
different depending on which of those
two approaches you apply and that will
be exactly the same with anyone else you
talk to and how you treat yourself and
how you interact with the world as such
because there's
a provision of possibility
that you're offered as a
participant in the process of creation
that you formulate in accordance with
your
aim what's the insistence in Genesis
1 aim up with
love so if you want to
establish the paradise of your household
in relationship to your wife and your
children you aim
at what's best for the best in them you
offer them the security that you can
imagine that's the walls of the Walled
Garden and
you present to them the challenge
that allows them to unfold and develop
optimally and you do that appropriately
if you're aiming at what's best what's
highest and that's the spirit of God
that Mak makes itself manifest on the
Waters of possibility that's the
embodiment The
Source the initial source and the spirit
of upward aiming ultimate
love you can understand this by
understanding what sort
of Walled Garden you produce in your
house own household with your
aim God
wrestles with the possibility that's not
yet manifest and creates the cosmic
order as a consequence in
sequence creating the fundamental
divisions to begin with the separation
of light and darkness that's the
phenomenology of day and night the
separation of the land from the waters
the establishment of the Dome of the sky
over the disc of the Earth
populates the world with its created
beings and on the sixth
day produces man and
says in his own
image so now we have a characterization
of God who's the dynamic process that
gives rise to order
from possibility itself in keeping with
the highest possible aim and we have a
characterization of the human being as a
microcosm of that
process the notion that each of us
has a worth that's transcendental and
not given by the state not given by
yourself not given by other individuals
is predicated on that image I mean that
historically and I mean it conceptually
the notion is
that one of the Notions is that the
state
itself has to Grant to you the worth
of someone created in the image of the
Creator himself in order even for the
state to exist maintain itself and
transform that the state itself cannot
function unless it
establishes a sacred boundary between
its operations and the operation of the
psyche the human psyche the human Spirit
that's a manifestation of The God Who
generates the order that's good from
possibility as your business grows the
workload can become overwhelming task
that used to take a day now take a week
if you're feeling this strain netsuite
is here to provide relief 37,000
businesses have upgraded to netsuite by
Oracle netsuite is the number one Cloud
Financial system streamlining accounting
financial management inventory HR and
much more for 25 years netsuite has been
helping businesses do more with less
close their books in days not weeks and
drive down costs recognizing that every
business is unique netsuite offers a
tailored solution that aligns with your
specific key performance indicators all
in one efficient system with a single
source of Truth netw Suite will help you
manage risks get reliable forecasts and
improve margins with netsuite you have
everything you need to grow all in one
place right now download Net's popular
kpi checklist designed to give you
consistently excellent performance for
absolutely free at netsuite.com jbp
that's nets.com jbp to get your own key
performance indicator checklist again
that's netsuite.com
jbp and you might
ask well who believes that and I would
say try talking to one person once
without believing that and see how it
goes we call to each other all the time
especially in our intimate relationships
to be treated as if we are the locus of
value and if you treat people that way
if you regard them that way if you
perceive them that way if you encourage
them in that pathway of
development
everything in your interactions with
human beings will open itself up to you
and fill your life with
abundance everyone wants to be treated
that way and the reason for that
is it's in keeping with our essential
nature and that that hospitable
welcoming
encouraging upward aiming loving
treatment is
the aim an attitude upon
which the Soul
the the soul the community and the
natural order itself Depends for its
Integrity your country is predicated on
that notion the idea that each of you is
owed with inalienable rights and their
requisite responsibilities is a d direct
reflection of that conceptualization and
one of the things you might frequently
remind yourself
of is the fact that your country
wouldn't be what it is which is the
closest approximation to a shining City
on the hill that's been established so
far in the travail of mankind without
that fundamental conception
[Applause]
right so
then you might say well is it true and
the answer
is it's not
hell I I mean that because lots of
countries are hell and they're Hell in a
way that opens up into an abyss and has
the possibility of a deeper Abyss
waiting latent within it which will open
up with the possibility of a deeper
Abyss within that and that's what
happens when that fundamental
characterization is overthrown in a
revolutionary manner or carelessly
abandoned and we saw that for all of us
who are non-believers and no longer
conceptualize the metaphysical hell is
real we saw the metaphysical hell
realized in the 20th century many times
in case
anyone having abandoned their
metaphysical
presuppositions was so blind that only
an object lesson would
suffice right Nazi
Germany the the Soviet Union under
Stalin the Chinese Communist Party under
Mao if that isn't close enough to hell
for
you then I would say you should pray
that you aren't introduced to something
even
worse for the purposes of convincing you
about what's
real in the second
God announces two things once he three
things four things once he creates man
he
says man is to tend the garden that's
his purpose why a garden it's a wall
Garden actually because that's what
Paradise means wall Garden why a Walled
Garden well a garden is a place of
nature obviously and walls are a place
of culture and a Walled Garden is a
place of
nature encapsulated in a manageable
manner by the walls of of culture that's
what your backyard is it's a yard it's
Nature has walls the walls are culture
the walls you could think of as
physical as physical entities as objects
but your your lawn has borders if you
don't have a fence and your neighbors
know where the borders are and where are
the borders well they're in the
imagination of your
neighbors I I'm I'm dead serious about
that the walls it's so funny cuz you'll
see people in the Border between Canada
and the United States say they'll get
out and they'll step across the border
it's
like as if it's an object of it as if
it's an entity that's there on the
ground and people know that that's magic
in some sense because the
grass in Canada is only slightly less
healthy than the grass in the United
States let's say
um it's easy to concretize that but the
the idea of a walled off space in a
communal Society is a social agreement
you have your domain your house your
your garden your backyard that's enough
Cosmos for you to set right and perhaps
if you're competent enough to do more
you'll expand your garden so that you
have more to tend but you start
with a Walled Garden of
some size and if you tend it properly
then and the promise is that as your
confidence grows so will your
Dominion man sent to tend the garden and
to name everything that's in it this is
Adam what is it what is that mean well
it's the logos again it's an
re-representation of the creative spirit
of God that makes itself manifest when
time begins and when new things come
into being our ability to name our
ability to speak is that in in the
microcosmic manner that's what we're
capable of doing that's what the
patriarchal Spirit does is name and
order the
world and God brings everything to Adam
to see what he'll name them and that's
a reflection of the idea
that we have a created order but man has
a place in it and the place is to
organize it and to put everything in its
proper place and to assign it its
identity and that's no different than
the prioritization of attention that's
part of the
story name things in relationship to
their function put things in place in
relationship to their
significance in the hierarchy of being
Orient them Orient all named things
things
upward
sequence
constrain organize and
order the manifestation of the
patriarchal Spirit what does God decide
that's not good
enough man lacks a helper man needs a
helper woman's created as a consequence
because the order that
men
produce because of their Lim Li itations
is insufficient and something has to be
introduced
to speak for that which is not
included that's the role of woman that's
the biblical role of the woman it's the
biological role of the mother you know
this in your own
household women bring the concerns of
the marginalized to the
center you can think about that
politically it's useful to think about
it politically all established human
orders
exclude the exclusion causes pain the
pain of exclusion requires a
voice that's the voice of the Eternal
mother that's where Genesis 1
ends Genesis 2 begins contains the story
of Adam and Eve it's another creation
story it's
commensurate with the first one it's a
variation on a
theme God creates Adam out
of
matter Earth and breath Spirit why
because that's what human beings are
we're material creatures that are
animated Ana means
Spirit we
what's the
spirit the spirit is the living
organizing principle of the
material and human beings are an amalgam
of the living organizing principle and
the material and that's what's portrayed
in the creation of
Adam the combination of matter and
spirit the combination of material and
conscious you could think about it that
way if you're more secular-minded we're
conscious
matter what's up with that no one
understands that no materialist
understands that we understand nothing
about Consciousness it's as mysterious
now as it's been throughout our the
entire course of our existence it's
never been reduced to a material
phenomena phenomenon we have no idea
what that would even mean and if we did
reduce it to the material all that would
mean was that we inadvertently elevated
the
material we treat each other like we're
were're conscious we presume from first
principles that we're conscious we can't
even distinguish between being itself
and being conscious and so that's a
perfectly reasonable representation of
man woman is taken from
man from a rib from the side as an
equal there's a critique of patriarchal
judeo Christian narrative from the
resentful feminist side that makes the
claim that the biblical narrative is for
example radically patriarchal in its
orientation dooming women to
subjugation um that's a Preposterous
Claim by the way it's it's not only
false it's false in a very particular
way there are falsehoods that are
approximations of the
truth there are falsehoods so deep that
they're the exact opposite of the truth
truth and the truth of the matter is
that right from the first
words the biblical library is miraculous
in its in its insistence that women like
men are made in the image of God that
emerges in the first chapter and that
Eve is the equal of Adam in every
manner although complimentary and not
identical and our society is Riven by
conflict so deep that we now doubt both
of those
propositions there's no form of
confusion more profound than
that sexually reproducing creatures
without nervous systems can tell the
difference between male and female I I'm
dead serious about
[Applause]
that if you can get people to swallow
the lie that there's no difference
between men and women there is No Lie
they won't swallow
right so God makes Adam and
Eve each with their own
role and he puts them in the garden to
play Forever under the watchful eye of
their heavenly father and he tells them
they have free rain in the garden with
everything delightful that's being
created that's been created
except for one thing they're not to eat
the fruit of the tree of the knowledge
of Good and
Evil so what does that mean man that's a
mystery I spent a long time trying to
crack the micro narratives in the story
of Adam and Eve and it wasn't until
three or four years ago that I think I
started to
understand that particular fragment of
the story friend of mine is here
Jonathan Paso some of you might have
been following
him Jonathan and his brother Matthew
really helped me crack this and so we're
here I'm here with Jonathan and a number
of my other colleagues and friends right
now with the daily wire recording
another seminar we released an exodus
seminar we're recording a seminar on the
gospels right now we're about 60% of the
way through that and so just so you know
that's also
forthcoming God tells human beings he
makes one fundamental
rule do not eat of the fruit of the tree
of the knowledge of Good and Evil okay
that's moral
knowledge that that should be
self-evident knowledge of Good and Evil
that's moral
knowledge moral knowledge is predicated
on the idea that there's an upward path
and a downward path that there are
desirable things and that there
undesirable things and that at the
Pinnacle of what's desirable is what's
Heavenly or paradisal and in the abysmal
depths of what's undesirable is the
Diabolical and the hellish and that's
the moral landscape that's the landscape
of Good and Evil that's the fictional
landscape fictional in the sense of
characterization and plot fictional in
the sense of distilled truth not
falsehood fictional in the sense that
the fiction describes the structure
through which you see the
world fiction as the deepest form of
Truth what does it mean to eat of the
fruit of the knowledge of Good and
Evil when nche announced the death of
God in the late 1800s he said
something that he believed would
constitute a pathway forward he said we
have dispensed with God we are the
greatest murderers who ever lived
we've engaged in a murder so profound
that will never wash away the blood how
could we
possibly how could we possibly conduct
ourselves in the aftermath of that
murder you read of n as a triumphant
anti-christian he
was a very complicated person and he
knew perfectly well that the dissolution
of the Christian metaphysic would
produce a cataclysmic consequence he
predicted in the late 1800s that Europe
would turn to a radically resentful
egalitarian
communitarianism that would kill tens of
millions of people which is exactly what
happened and he saw that coming just as
clearly as his Russian counterpart
Theodore dovi saw it he knew what would
rise in the aftermath of the death of
God he knew that resentment and
communitarianism would be one
Temptation and he tried to formulate a
alternative path he said we're going to
have to create our own values we're
going to have to take it upon ourselves
to create the moral
landscape I read that and I understood
why he said that I could see its
influence on Clinical Psychology for
example the notion of the
self-actualized person the notion that
our soul should unfold in the direction
that's commensurate with the deepest
understanding of our subjective selves
right the radical unveiling of
subjectivity
self-de I am what I say I am which is a
radical claim in our society now a claim
of omniscience not only am I who I say I
am you better act like I am who I say I
am that's the claim of the radical
subjective well what's wrong with that
claim well the psychoanalysts criticized
n very effectively they said look how
are you going to create your own values
when you're not master in your own house
have you tried telling yourself what to
do how does that work for you I know
you're just your own obedient servant
right you're so morally pure you just
tell
yourself at New Year's that you're going
to go to the gym and you're going to
diet and you're going to be some Stellar
physique lean mean fighting machine by
March and you go once and then you tell
yourself lies about why you don't have
to go again and that's the end of that
and if you were capable of creating your
own values you wouldn't
be
the the banner the tattered Banner that
blows in the Wind of its own
whims the psychoanalyst figured this out
very quickly you're a war of competing
whims and a creature like that's going
to have a very difficult time navigating
the complex landscape of the
ultimate
moral
pronouncement who are you to make a
decision about what constitutes good and
evil and that's what God tells men and
women it's like you don't get to create
the moral order you get to dwell within
it you get to align yourself with the
pre-existent moral order you do not take
to yourself the right the presumption to
Define good and evil themselves
you bow
your head to good and
you pray for deliverance from
Evil and if you violate that look the
hell out and that's the pronouncement
and so what
happens the serpent
offers
Eve the fruit why the serpent well the
serpent is camouflaged
the serpent is Crafty
subtle the serpent
is marginalized the serpent is the voice
of Pride the serpent is Lucifer that's
the metaphysical surrounding of the
story that de develops over centuries
the notion that the serpent in the
garden of paradise is Lucifer himself
the spirit of
Pride what does that mean it's prideful
presumption it makes you assume that you
can Define the moral
order what's the provide what's the
prideful presumption of Eve at the
beginning of time and
forever I can even clasp the serpent to
my
breast it's the careless welcoming in of
the Monstrous and
prideful under the guise of the
pretension of maternal
compassion and if you can't see that
happening in our society you're
blind it might be easy to just toss all
of your discipline to the side for the
summer but a life of greatness doesn't
happen by taking the easy route the
Hallow app offers an incredible range of
guided meditations and prayers that are
designed to help you deepen your
spirituality and strengthen your
connection to God with hallow you can
embark on a journey of exploration
diving into different themes and types
of prayer and meditation from gratitude
to forgiveness each session offers a
unique experience sparking your
curiosity and deepening your spiritual
understanding you can choose different
lengths of meditation to fit your
schedule whether you have a few minutes
or an hour with its userfriendly
interface and hundreds of guided
meditations the hall app has quickly
become a go-to resource for people
seeking spiritual growth and healing you
can download the app for free at
hall.com Jordan it allows you to set
prayer reminders and track your progress
Hall is truly transformative and it'll
help you connect with your faith on a
deeper level
don't lose your prayer habits this
summer maintain your peace and deepen
your relationship with God download the
Hallow app today at hall.com Jordan for
an exclusive 3-month trial that's
hall.com
Jordan and what's the sin of a of
Adam well what do men care about women
care
about properly
about the helpless infant
it's a powerful feminine virtue and it
can be inverted and made prideful and
trumpeted and
presumptuous to infantilize the world
and to advertise that compassion as a
badge
of worth and honor as a mode of
attaining
status what's Adam's sin what do men
care about impressing
women men are ambitious fundamentally to
impress
women For Better or For
Worse what's the prideful pathway and
false Pathway
to establishing a relationship with the
two demanding
feminine I've got
it anything you want
dear right and that's Adam's sin he Eve
hearkens to the voice of of The Serpent
and clutches it to her
breast in despite the clear injunction
from the Divine never to do that and
Adam weakly does exactly what the worst
part of his wife
wants and so here we are
folks so what's the consequence of that
well the scales fall from The Rock and
they notice they're
naked and they're deeply ashamed and
they cover
up they become
self-conscious okay so when do people
become
self-conscious when they make prideful
errors when you overreach and you Reveal
Your inadequacy as a consequence of the
mismatch between your pride and your
ability you'll be
ashamed you'll recognize your
insufficiency
you'll be aware of yourself as an
isolated entity that's all to become
self-conscious psychologists have
learned over the last 40 years that
there's no difference between being
conscious of yourself and being
miserable those are literally the same
thing if you're living a life of other
centered Community oriented
hospitable
calling you're not attending to the
miseries of your isolated self
if you stay in your bwick and you don't
put forward your hand
presumptuously you can live in the
absence of painful self-consciousness
Pride
goes before a fall we have a month
devoted to Pride in our culture
right Pride goes before a fall you know
this in your own life you can ask
yourself and this is has been a
Christian conundrum since the beginning
of time
is your life miserable because misery is
baked into the structure of the world or
is your life miserable because you do
stupid things and refuse to learn and
bring endless misery on yourself in your
presumption and you know you might say a
little column A and A little a column B
and fair enough but you certainly know
that the most painful episodes of your
life come when
you claim falsely to be more than you
are and
the Cor narrative
in the Christian judeo Christian ethos
is
that the fall of Man into the profane
world is a consequence of
Pride and that is really something worth
thinking about you know Adam and Eve are
called upon to work in misery as a
consequence of their pride well could
you work
joyfully if you didn't overreach
yourself if you were aiming upward
properly if you were telling the truth
if you were acting communally if you're
acting in relationship to what was
highest would it be possible that your
work would be joyful and bring abundance
isn't there times in your life when
that's happened is it is it the case
that you move forward in misery in
precise proportion to the pretention of
your
aim it's worth
considering it's the suspicion that
arises at the end of the story that
begins history because it's with
the prideful fall of Adam and Eve that
him history
begins Adam and Eve discover they're
naked and they they hide and God comes
along and says Adam where are you and
Adam says I'm over here I'm I'm hiding
and God says well why are you hiding
it's a foolish thing to do right because
Adam is perfectly aware that God can see
through bushes Adam is hiding from God
is it your
pathetic self-consciousness that makes
you hide from
God that's a good question are you not
everything you could be because you're
ashamed of who you are that's what that
story indicates and so God calls Adam on
he says who told you why are you hiding
and Adam says well I'm naked and God
says
well how do you find out that you were
naked how did you find out that you were
inadequate how did you find out that you
are shameful and Adam says you know that
woman you made
me it's her fault and that's the second
sin of Adam and that's another
indication of the nonpatriarchal nature
of the text you know Eve is the first
human being to take a bite of the Apple
but Adam follows along and it isn't
obvious to me that the follower of sin
is in a worse better moral position than
the initiator and then he compounds his
sin like men do by blaming the woman why
is your life so well if you had my wife
man you'd know it's like those damn
women it's like it's a handy excuse for
men all the time to say that and it's
not least because men can't tolerate
being rejected by women and women reject
them all the time and the reason women
reject them is because they're not all
they should
be and so of course that makes men
painfully self-conscious and makes them
shake their fist at God and makes them
hide and so what God says and so Adam
reveals himself in this pathetic manner
it's like he can't even take
responsibility for his own misstep he
has to blame the thing that's been
granted to him as the highest form of
gift and not only her but
God whose fault is it well it's not mine
it's probably women's fault and if it's
not women it's clearly God it can't be
me so what happens while both Adam and
Eve are condemned to suffer in their
work
and that's how history begins and that's
the situation of Fallen of the Fallen
World and that's the description of
the landscape
of profound fiction that
we that we
inhabit and that's only a tiny fraction
of the characterization of God and man
in the
biblical
Corpus thank you very much
[Music]